Remove embedding disambiguation in favor of computed rels (#660)
begriffs/postgrest-docs: docs/references/api/resource_embedding.rst

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: http

    GET /orders?select=name,billing_address(name) HTTP/1.1

  .. code-tab:: bash Curl

    curl "http://localhost:3000/orders?select=name,billing_address(name)"

.. code-block:: json

   [
    {
     "name": "Personal Water Filter",
     "billing_address": {
       "name": "32 Glenlake Dr.Dearborn, MI 48124"
     }
    }
   ]

.. _recursive_o2o_embed:

Recursive One-To-One
--------------------

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: ERD

    .. image:: ../../_static/presidents.png

  .. code-tab:: postgresql SQL

    create table presidents (
      id int primary key generated always as identity,
      first_name text,
      last_name text,
      predecessor_id int references presidents(id) unique
    );

To get either side of the Recursive One-To-One relationship, create the functions:

.. code-block:: postgresql

  create or replace function predecessor(presidents) returns setof presidents rows 1 as $$
    select * from presidents where id = $1.predecessor_id
  $$ stable language sql;

  create or replace function successor(presidents) returns setof presidents rows 1 as $$
    select * from presidents where predecessor_id = $1.id

>   $$ stable language sql;

Reviewer: For completeness, let's also use `successor` in the request. It's fine to use both on a single one.

Now, to query a president with its predecessor:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: http

    GET /presidents?select=last_name,predecessor(last_name)&id=eq.2 HTTP/1.1

  .. code-tab:: bash Curl

    curl "http://localhost:3000/presidents?select=last_name,predecessor(last_name)&id=eq.2"

.. code-block:: json

  [
    {
      "last_name": "Adams",
      "predecessor": {
        "last_name": "Washington"
      }
    }
  ]

.. _recursive_o2m_embed:

Recursive One-To-Many
---------------------

This case works the same way as a normal :ref:`Many-To-One relationship<many-to-one>`.

> It is the default behavior for when you have a table like this one:

Reviewer: This works because we have a disambiguation hack for preferring the O2M:

https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/blob/28d5278d624ae262fc78345560e269be2ef99777/src/PostgREST/Plan.hs#L473-L486

As stated on https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/issues/2863, we plan to remove this completely. So we shouldn't rely on this behavior. Here we should define a computed rel.

  create or replace function supervisor(employees) returns setof employees rows 1 as $$
    select * from employees where id = $1.supervisor_id
  $$ stable language sql;

Then, the query would be:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: http

    GET /employees?select=last_name,supervisor(last_name)&id=eq.3 HTTP/1.1

  .. code-tab:: bash Curl

    curl "http://localhost:3000/employees?select=last_name,supervisor(last_name)&id=eq.3"

.. code-block:: json

  [
    {
      "last_name": "Miller",
      "supervisor": {
        "last_name": "Taylor"
      }
    }
  ]

.. _recursive_m2m_embed:

Recursive Many-To-Many
----------------------

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: ERD

    .. image:: ../../_static/users.png

  .. code-tab:: postgresql SQL

    create table users (
      id int primary key generated always as identity,
      first_name text,
      last_name text,
      username text unique
    );

    create table subscriptions (
      subscriber_id int references users(id),
      subscribed_id int references users(id),
      type text,
      primary key (subscriber_id, subscribed_id)
    );

To get all the subscribers of a user, define the function:

.. code-block:: postgresql

>   create or replace function subscribers(users) returns setof users as $$

Reviewer: Hm, getting a user's subscriptions (with usernames) works OOTB here? I think we need another computed rel?

Author: Yeah, another computed rel was needed. I added it now.

  - Make sure to correctly label the ``to-one`` part of the relationship. When using the ``ROWS 1`` estimation, PostgREST will expect a single row to be returned. If that is not the case, it will unnest the embedding and return repeated values for the top level resource.

.. _embed_disamb:
.. _hint_disamb:
.. _target_disamb:
.. _complex_rels:

Complex Relationships
=====================

As mentioned on :ref:`resource_embedding`, the server does joins based on **Foreign Keys**.
When there are many foreign keys between tables, it needs disambiguation to resolve which foreign key columns to use for the join.

:ref:`computed_relationships` can do the job here, they can choose join columns arbitrarily.

.. note::

>   `Embedding disambiguation <https://postgrest.org/en/v11.1/references/api/resource_embedding.html#embedding-disambiguation>`_ using ``!hint`` or ``!target`` is now deprecated.
>   Follow the solutions in this section when a ``300 Multiple Choices`` error is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Previous versions addressed complex relationships with `Embedding disambiguation <https://postgrest.org/en/v11.1/references/api/resource_embedding.html#embedding-disambiguation>`_ but this is now deprecated. Follow the solutions in this section when a ``300 Multiple Choices`` error is returned.
```

.. _multiple_m2o:

Multiple Many-To-One
--------------------

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: ERD

    .. image:: ../../_static/orders.png

  .. code-tab:: postgresql SQL

    create table addresses (
      id int primary key generated always as identity,
      name text,
      city text,
      state text,
      postal_code char(5)
    );

    create table orders (
      id int primary key generated always as identity,
      name text,
      billing_address_id int references addresses(id),
      shipping_address_id int references addresses(id)
    );

To successfully embed ``orders`` with ``addresses``, you need to create computed relationships for the foreign keys columns you want to use:

.. code-block:: postgresql

  create function billing_address(orders) returns setof addresses rows 1 as $$
    select * from addresses where id = $1.billing_address_id
  $$ stable language sql;

  create function shipping_address(orders) returns setof addresses rows 1 as $$
    select * from addresses where id = $1.shipping_address_id
  $$ stable language sql;

> Now, we can unambiguously embed the billing and shipping addresses by selecting the computed relationships.

Reviewer: Can be shortened:

```suggestion
Now, we can unambiguously embed the billing and shipping addresses.
```

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: http

    GET /orders?select=name,billing_address(name),shipping_address(name) HTTP/1.1

  .. code-tab:: bash Curl

    curl "http://localhost:3000/orders?select=name,billing_address(name),shipping_address(name)"

.. code-block:: json

   [
     {
       "name": "Personal Water Filter",
       "billing_address": {
         "name": "32 Glenlake Dr.Dearborn, MI 48124"
       },
       "shipping_address": {
         "name": "30 Glenlake Dr.Dearborn, MI 48124"
       }
     }
   ]

.. _multiple_o2m:

Multiple One-To-Many

> --------------------

Author: Since we're looking for completeness in the examples, I added this one too. We could remove it if it's too much.

Reviewer: Looks good!

Let's take the tables from :ref:`multiple_m2o`.
To embed ``addresses`` with  ``orders``, you need to create computed relationships like these ones:

.. code-block:: postgresql

>   create function orders_billing(addresses) returns setof orders as $$
>     select * from orders where billing_address_id = $1.id
>   $$ stable language sql;

Reviewer: Hm, shouldn't this be `billing_orders`?

```suggestion
  create function billing_orders(addresses) returns setof orders as $$
    select * from orders where billing_address_id = $1.id
  $$ stable language sql;
```

>   create function orders_shipping(addresses) returns setof orders as $$

Reviewer: Ditto
```suggestion
  create function shipping_orders(addresses) returns setof orders as $$
```

  - Make sure to correctly label the ``to-one`` part of the relationship. When using the ``ROWS 1`` estimation, PostgREST will expect a single row to be returned. If that is not the case, it will unnest the embedding and return repeated values for the top level resource.

.. _complex_rels:

Complex Relationships
=====================

> In most cases, you need to use :ref:`computed_relationships` to embed a resource with itself.

Author: Maybe this should go or change to something like:

```suggestion
In most cases, you need to use :ref:`computed_relationships` to embed complex relationships.
```

It was referring to the Recursive Relationships before.

   }

.. _embed_disamb:
.. _hint_disamb:
.. _target_disamb:
.. _multiple_relationships:

Multiple Relationships
----------------------

When there are multiple foreign keys between two or more tables, PostgREST does not infer the embedding directly.
You need to use :ref:`computed_relationships` in these cases. For example, suppose you have the following ``orders`` and ``addresses`` tables:

.. image:: ../../_static/orders.png

> To successfully embed ``orders`` with ``addresses``, you need to create computed relationships for the foreign keys that you want to use:

Author: Started directly with the solution without mentioning the `300 Multiple Choices`  error as mentioned in point 2 of https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/issues/2863.

.. code-block:: postgresql

  create function billing_address(orders) returns setof addresses rows 1 as $$
    select * from addresses where id = $1.billing_address_id
  $$ stable language sql;

  create function shipping_address(orders) returns setof addresses rows 1 as $$
    select * from addresses where id = $1.shipping_address_id
  $$ stable language sql;

> For instance, now we can unambiguously embed the billing address by specifying the ``billing_address`` computed relationship.

Author: I only kept one example here and removed the "Hint dissambiguation" that uses views, because in those cases the solution is exactly the same as this one.
